Looop City

Abstract:

What is a loop?  
And when does the given structure of a simple looping repetition become a complex knot?
In this text I will claim that the knot is an inevitability, both of post-Duchampian artistic practice and of 21st century virtual environments.
I will analyze what I find to be purely conceptual parameters activated by the loop,
yet suggest that materially, the loop resolves in the form of a knot.
Caught at the intersection of coding and creativity, this text will invoke 
the readymade to situate algorithmic meta-programming against artistic practice.

I will trace 3 distinct narratives, first marking the Duchampian inheritance
in order to disentangle conceptual loop from contemporary knot.
It is a bit of a trickier operation to historicize the loop given in a root of representational art, 
but anchoring a visual foundation will help clarify the image of the knot’s present day media-agnosticism.  I will further rely on music metaphors to bridge and sequence connections between melody and scripting.

The text itself is written an active investigation of the structures that modify and enforce the virtual loop, through versioning software.  
With each edited version, I will push modifications to a GitHub repository, along chapter’s appropriate timeline.  You can follow me under the username “loopcity” and the work at https://github.com/loopcity/loopcity/  
Not only will my writing process be fully traceable, but it will allow me to call any version back down to the master branch.
A timeline of the branching is visible at https://github.com/loopcity/loopcity/network
Ultimately, I hope to be able to translate the writer’s loop the nonlinear recursions of merge versions to resolve in a knotted document alongside the formal text.


Distributed across 3 distinct narratives, I will first disentangle conceptual loop from contemporary knot, before separately distinguishing the loop’s historical precedence and the knot’s inevitability.


Notions of in time and space.

keywords
algorithm coding Duchamp knot loop programming readymade versioning

1. Loop City:  An Introduction
2. The Book of Knots:  Duchamp in the Mirror
3. Rooting the Loop:  A History
4. The Age of the Algorithm: 21st Century Practice
5. Approximate Infinite:  Conclusions
