Looop City

Abstract:

What is a loop?  
It is a question of “what if?”—what if what if what if…
Like an image without a caption, the loop is a story that has forgotten its own history in order to overwrite the present.  
It carries with it the momentum of the question, but how does that looping inquiry accumulate complexity in time?

The text introduces the knot as an inevitability, born of post-Duchampian artistic practice and 21st century virtual environments.  

The contemporary knot to first disentangles purely conceptual parameters active in both analog and digital loops, and further to suggest the structures inevitable materiality of both.

to conceptual loop from contemporary knot,

Caught at the intersection of coding and creativity, this text will invoke 
the readymade to situate algorithmic meta-programming against artistic practice.

I will trace 3 distinct narratives, first marking the Duchampian inheritance
in order to disentangle conceptual loop from contemporary knot.
It is a bit of a trickier operation to historicize the loop given in a root of representational art, 
but anchoring a visual foundation will help clarify the image of the knot’s present day media-agnosticism.  I will further rely on music metaphors to bridge and sequence connections between melody and scripting.

The text itself is written an active investigation of the structures that modify and enforce the virtual loop, through versioning software.  
With each edited version, I will push revisions to a GitHub repository, along each chapter’s appropriate timeline.  You can follow me under the username “loopcity” at https://github.com/loopcity/loopcity/.
Not only will my writing process be fully traceable, but Git will allow me to merge versions back down to the master branch at any moment.
A timeline of the branching is visible at: https://github.com/loopcity/loopcity/network.
Ultimately, I hope to be able to translate the writer’s loop of nonlinear recursions to generate in a knotted document alongside the formal text.
If the loop is a question—“what if?”—disentangling its sympathetic knots revels in the pure pursuit.

keywords
algorithm coding Duchamp knot loop programming readymade versioning
