3.  Rooting the Loop:  A History
	Who invented the loop?  It would be difficult to avoid the loop’s instantiation upon representational art without mentioning the resurrection of Christ—not only as a narrative loop, but also given the populous of imagery circulated as meta-narrative.  The ‘Jesus Saves’ dictum might be bolstered by ‘Jesus Loops,’ entwined with the Word as Gutenburg’s movable type is.
	But we could also be talking about disco and 60’s record production.  Alongside the theological loop stand an antithetical absence.  Meco Monardo[1] refers to the break, “It was nice to hear the song for a minute or so, but then if you just hear the music (without words) and then you could imagine the song in your mind. That's a very very powerful thing.”[2]  First there was the break—music without lyrics—and then there was the breakbeat—an interstitial silencing of all instruments except drums.  Record producer and ‘accidental’ inventor of the 12” single Tom Moulton describes extending the mix in order to give people more time to dance.
	I got a record for Scepter Records, it was called 'Dreamworld' by Don 		Downing. That was the very first record I ever went into mix. It immaculated! 	[Immaculation is when the key goes up.]  Alright, so in the second part of the 	record, towards the end of the record it immaculated to another key. So what 	happened is I went to make a long version of it and of course I want to get 		back to the beginning of the song and of course the key drops down. And I 	went; 'Oh, this is horrible! So what am I gonna do?' I said; 'Like I feel that I 		can do, is take out everything that's musical.' So that how it went into a drum 	break. Then, I would start putting in percussion back in, then I would bring the 	bass. So in the long version the song actually sounds like it's immaculate 		twice, but it only does once. But that's how it was created.[3]
By simply extending the loop.
	This chapter takes audio production as it’s foundation, and ramps the speculation on the loop’s history.  Andy Warhol has often been credited with inventing the filmic loop—a product of having his three-minute Screen Tests play in galleries.  I hope to find a mechanical source to balance the mythic repetition of attributed to gods carrying the sun across the sky by day.  Is movable type a knot?


[1] "Meco Monardo." Discogs. Accessed June 3, 2016. https://www.discogs.com/artist/286787-Meco-Monardo.  Also known anagrammatically as Barb Donmora, Brab Donmora, Derf Nardomo, Dom Monardo, Dominic Menardo, Dominick J. Monardo, Enrico Macardo, Lekly Roomdan, M. Monardo, Meco, Meco Menardo, Meco*, Mico Monardo, Miko Monardo, Monardo, Onty Anmodro, Ynot Anmodro, and Ynot Odranom.
[2] Discoguy. "Tom Moulton Tribute." Disco-disco.com. Accessed April 4, 2016. http://www.disco-disco.com/tributes/tom.shtml.
Italics mine.
[3] Ibid.
